♪♪ Music ♪♪
I think youth are
really good for this if given a
chance to explore, there is some
spark that is still alive and
well in most youth that is
calling for the wild, like the
call of the wild.
It's calling for that
reconnection, it is the call to
wholeness, it is the call home
because the healing force of
nature is there and
it wants balance.
The challenging part is
sometimes balance comes in
pretty jarring forms.
How do we reconnect?
How do we come down
from the highrise,
put our feet
on the earth,
plant some seeds, learn what's
growing around us that we used
to call weeds, so that we're
prepared for change and that
we're empowered.
And we realize we're never
really poor, we're never really
homeless.
And that on a physical
level with the earth and on a
spiritual level
with our Creator.
But I think what has happened
in the century, is slowly we've
almost become orphans in the
sense that our rational minds
have disconnected us from nature
and dissected everything to this
cold and material place.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
That song is a
Sioux buffalo song that asked
the spirits to come and sit with
us and now if you notice when we
started to drum and the
wind picked up and that's
grandmothers and grandfathers
that are coming in and welcoming
us and acknowledging that
we are here. When you sound
that drum and sound the
whistle, you smoke those
pipes, now you have the
attention of the ones that
walked here before us and
believe me, they're not very far
away.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
So here we
are with comfrey or symphytum
officinale and when you watch
this plant grow in the spring,
one thing that stands out about
it is that it's extremely fast
and its leaves get
extremely large.
What we're looking at here is a
very small specimen of comfrey.
Mainly what this plant is known
for is regenerating tissues so
much so that you don't want to
use it where there's a situation
of a wound that is infected
because it will get cell
proliferation actions happening
so fast that you're not able to
get the infection
out of the wound.
So you always want to make sure
that the tissue itself is fairly
clean and there's no infection
at which point you can use
comfrey in a poultice.
The root used traditionally its
names are knit bone for example,
bone set, it is used for
regenerating tissues even at
level of the bone,
regenerating bone.
So it's not surprising that
this plant is and incredible
regenerator.
The root has been used for
regenerating any inflamed and
degenerated tissues,
the bowels, the lungs...
throughout history, it's been
used with other herbs such as
elecampane for healing really
deep seeded infections of
the lungs or inflammations
of the lungs.
So you really don't want to use
this plant without thinking when
considering that there is
some controversy over it but any
herbalist I know, and if you
look into the books, the history
books, this plant
has been used safely
for 100s of years...
if not 1000's.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
So here we are
with calendula, it's primarily
known as an
incredible wound healer.
It's used on burns, cuts,
scrapes, all kinds of abrasions,
it's a disinfectant but at the
same time it stimulates new cell
growth.
It's a very healing plant.
It's usually the flower that's
used and it's often made into
ointment.
This ointment is made by a local
herbalist River City Herbals,
but it looks basically,
it's a salve meets an ointment.
It's basically the calendula
soaked in some sort of oil and
mixed with some beeswax that can
be applied to dry irritated skin
or any kind of burn or cut.
Also you notice from looking at
calendula, that it has a very
good, bright, very,
very bright color to it.
It contains some similar
compounds that you might find in
such things like carrots.
And so the calendula is also
very good for the eyes as well.
This has traditionally
been used in cancer formulas.
If you think about it, cancer
is type of rot, it's a type of
darkness in a way.
What you're trying to
bring to it is light, color,
antioxidants, a brightness
quality, a light force quality
and calendula is
definitely all of those things.
So if we also consider that all
kinds of diseases are related to
inflammation, any herb
that we can find that's an
anti-inflammatory is
extremely helpful for us
to call upon when
we need it.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
So here we are at another
sacred site, here in
what's known as the Whiteshell
Provincial Park, the first
nation people know it as
manito Ahbee, at least the local
Anishinaabe people.
This is the place where creator
sits and it happens to also be
the center of North America
which is also referred to as
Turtle Island.
If we don't have a good
relationship spiritually to the
land and to our source
of creation, it affects
psychologically and if we're not
balanced psychologically, the
body becomes affected.
We all know what it's like if
we feel anxiety or if we feel
stress or depression.
If we feel anxiety or we feel
arousal or hunger because we see
something around us or we think
something, the body responds.
For example when we use a plant
to heal, let's say we use a
bitter plant like yarrow, this
bitter flavor goes in and this
medicine is very highly refined
and complex medicine that works
in many ways in the body will
start to cleanse out the liver
and one things that happen
when we cleanse the liver, is we
actually start to move stored
emotion and so part of healing
process is to actually move
and keep flow happening in body
where they might otherwise be
stuck emotional issues, grief,
resentment, fear, these are all
stored in different areas of the
body and this is a traditional
understanding around the world
that you can't separate the
health of body from the health
of the mind.
I find flower essences are very
good because
an awful lot of people have
shut down the forth heart chakra
because they have been wounded.
It can be jilted at a dance all
the way to an ugly divorce and
that's where the problem
is. In the flower essences
you can be able to open
heart but have it protected.
Most people are scared to open
up the fourth chakra because
they've been wounded and so
the yarrow, especially the pink
yarrow here, is the best
one for protecting the heart.
So what I use is a combination
borrage, pink yarrow and
Alberta wild rose with the
other two yarrows,
white yarrow and yellow
yarrow to create a protection.
And then if there are other joys
that need to be brought into
their life maybe buttercup
or selfheal or something along
those lines but that would
help protect so I'm giving the
physical reality of herbs and
then the flower essence is the
energizer.
If I have person who comes in
and has had a heart attack,
I can be throwing Hawthorn at
them and reishi at them and
coenzyme Q10 and all those
herbs,but they won't stick.
If the chakra's closed down,
there's not enough magnetic
energy to do that.
So I have to open that up, so I
need the flower essence to open
that level up so they can have
a magnetic thing to attract the
herbs to.
And it's necessary and that's
just as true if it's the cancer
of sexual organs. I need to
work on the second chakra and
thyroid, whatever.
But the center of gravity, well
you've got seven and the middle
is four that would be the heart.
It is the place that we have to
center in and literally it's the
one for us to grow out of our
third ego chakra into our fourth
chakra so we can communicate
with our head again.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
Here we are
with motherwort.
The Latin name for this plant is
Leonurus Cardiaca which says a
lot because one of its main uses
is for helping the heart, to
calm the heart, calm the nerves.
It's very commonly used in
heart palpitation situations.
It's also used along with other
herbs such as dong quai or dang
gui in Chinese medicine to
regulate the menstrual cycle.
I know women that have also used
this for addressing hot flashes
and if you look at this plant,
it's really not a surprise that
it's great for the heart because
it makes basically a perfect
cross.
And if anyone's familiar
with heart chakra in eastern
medicine, they'll recognize
that the symbol is the perfect
balance of an upward and
downward triangle sort of joined
together and this cross
represents centered balance to
calm the heart.
It's hard for the heart to be
calm when the mind is overly
active and so one of the main
ways that we use motherwort is
to calm the nerves
and calm the mind.
We use motherwort also in
situations where we want high
over functioning thyroids
because the thing about
hyperthyroidism is that it's
often accompanying hyper active
adrenal situations or a
personalities that are really
stuck in fight or
flight responses its seems.
A person who is coming at their
lives from a very stressful
point, is that the adrenal's get
exhausted over time
with cortisol production and
adrenaline production.
The adrenal and the thyroid
work really closely together.
Ultimately, all the glands are
working really closely together.
So if we want to calm the
thyroid down, motherwort is very
helpful in combination with
plants such as bugleweed and
lemon balm. But we have to
consider how a person is
relating to their life, what
their breathing patterns are,
what their eating patterns
are and whether they're using
stimulates and how they're
relating to their life.
So when it comes to any sort
of issues of calming the heart,
which in Chinese medicine is
very closely associated with the
state of the mind or addressing
thyroid issues, menopausal
issues, blood flow issues,
we can call on the this not
surprisingly named
plant, motherwort.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
Here we are with the
magnificent Angelica or Dong
Quai.
This plant is primarily known as
a fertility tonic and a general
overall tonic.
As you can see, it's very
strong, from the color of its
reddish hue, it's not surprising
that it's also a blood builder.
It's used in cases of anemia,
in cases of hair loss, or
dizziness, tinnitus,
heart palpitations.
When we're talking about in
other areas in this film, we're
talking about the importance
of agnee or digestive function.
In Ayurveda, the sexual energy
or ging energy in Chinese or in
Daoist traditions,
in Ayurveda traditions it's
referred to as ojas.
Now, ojas transforms into
agni energy and agni energy
transforms from there into shen
energy. So it goes from sexual
energy to pure chi and
then it gets transformed into
consciousness.
So when we're working with
sexual tonics, we're not just
looking to stimulate. for men
for example there's other herbs
out there like damiana as a yang
tonic or there's horny goat weed
for example, muira puama,
yohimbe, they're all incredible.
But really from a holistic
perspective, what you're trying
to do is nurture the body and
you don't want to overdo it.
So when you're talking about
nurturing the body, when I say
overdoing it. I mean, use
that energy up right away.
Examples of tonics would
be like, for men and women
ashwagandha though ashwagandha
is an Indian herb, it's usually
used for males in India and
around the world now but it can
also be used for females.
It's a tonic for the adrenals,
it's a tonic for the thyroid,
overall nurturing for the body,
health will equate to sexual
energy and vibrancy so we need
to embrace that as part of a
holistic program.
Another commonly known one is
Siberian ginseng, this is known
to increase the performance
of athletes, increase immune
function, and all of these
things are tied together.
There are studies out of Russia
where workers can get a lot more
done in a day, they can function
sharper on a mental level.
All of these can be traced back
to a certain ging or ojas energy
in the body.
But the important thing to
remember when we're talking
about these tonics is that the
point is not just to increase
the sexuality urge but to use
that within the nervous system
to keep the body healthy, keep
the immune system functioning
well.
When we're talking about
hormonal balancers for females,
dong quai would be used
alongside other herbs like
chaste tree berry or vitex
which is an incredible hormone
balancer.
Women can also use red clover
which I speak about commonly and
use commonly.
We can also use
this alongside maca.
Maca is known as a Peruvian
ginseng and they give it to
young couples to
increase their fertility.
Again, it's a root, it's
a tonic, and it's full of
nourishment.
But if we're going to talk about
a holistic system of healing, we
embrace this sexual energy for
we also use that for vitality
and chi within the body, moving
it with breath and exercise and
ideally bringing it up to the
brain and having
it sort of bloom.
In this case, you see angelica..
it's very strong stalk, very
strong  body, very strong root
which is usually what's used for
the medicine, is the root.
But then, look at the flowers,
look how many seeds there are
and look at the messages of it.
It's a very expansive herb, it's
very good for consciousness and
if you even think, about the
name angelica, what that might
mean, although it's also known
around the world as dong quai or
dang gui.
So we're talking about blood
tonics, we're talking about
fertility, we're talking about
sexual energy. But in an eastern
system of healing, to increase
sexual urge can actually lead to
more dis-ease if it's going in
the direction of lust because
lust and greed are very similar
and when they talk about that in
Tibetan medicine the three main
causes of dis-ease are greed,
hatred and ignorance.
So that might sound like what
does that have to do with the
body but all of those equate to
feeling and energy in the body
affecting the whole body
just like any type of stress or
emotion affects the body.
So when we're talking about
sexual tonics, the ideal place
to take that energy to a place
of love, devotion and bliss.
And so these tonics are
often used alongside oil like
sandalwood or rose for example.
So, even in pregnancy tonics for
people who can't conceive you
will often see them used
alongside herbs or essences,
essential oils like sandalwood.
Like rose, things that are very
sattvic, sweet, they bring that
sexual energy up into the heart
from there, from that chi center
that promise center, that vital
energy and that softness bliss
energy, it can come up
into the brain and we can have
transcendent awareness
experiences that are very
healing not just for the
individual but for
the whole planet.
This is where we take a magic
bullet question how do I get
pregnant or how do I increase my
libido and we understand it more
holistically and we can see the
potential not just for libido
but to other levels
of experience as well.
So the desire to merge on
the physical level can be
transformed to the desire to
merge on the heart level and can
be the desire to merge on
the divine level as well and
angelica is incredible
representation of the holistic
plant that has all
of those qualities.
♪♪ Music ♪♪
The plants are
here to help us, they provide us
with life and we are
dependent upon them.
They too are living beings that
breathe, drink, eat, feel and
reproduce.
They offer us a chance to walk
in the sacred garden of life.
"glory"
To feel the harmonic
blessing of creation. Our place
in the web of life
and miraculous cures.
The guidance and healing we
receive when we act as both
students and stewards of nature
is more than the quality and
longevity of our own lives.
It is about the healing,
survival and evolution on all
levels.
It is also about finding our
greater role as human beings,
serving the next generation and
caring for the world within and
around us.
This is the path of the plant
lover, the wild crafter
the herbalist.
♪♪ Music ♪♪